Add subwasm guide (#503)
substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs: v3/how-to-guides/08-tools/d-subwasm/index.mdx

---
title: Verify Runtime Wasm Binaries with Subwasm
slug: /how-to-guides/v3/tools/subwasm
keywords: tooling, wasm
version: 3.0 
section: how to guides
category: tools
---

[Subwasm](https://github.com/chevdor/subwasm) provides a way to expose the features of the runtime for any Substrate chain. 
This guide steps through the different capabilities that Subwasm provides. 

## Use cases

- Expose verifiable historical information of a chain's runtime for front end applications.

> - Get a quick snapshot of the modules in a runtime.

Reviewer: I can't suggest direct commits because Lisa's comment bisects the text, but I think we want to get away from **Use cases**. 
Suggest the following:

[Subwasm](https://github.com/chevdor/subwasm) provides a way to expose the features of the runtime for any Substrate chain. This guide shows you how to use Subwasm to do the following: 

- Expose verifiable historical information of a chain's runtime for front end applications.
- Get a snapshot of the modules in a runtime.
- Check for changes between runtimes using a diff.
- Expose a verifiable runtime for transparency.

Author: 👌🏻

- Check for changes between runtimes using a diff.

> - Expose a verifiable runtime for governance transparency.

Author: The point here is about using Subwasm to provide transparency when runtime upgrades are being voted on in on-chain governance motions. Modified this to:
> Expose a verifiable runtime for transparency in proposals for runtime upgrades.

## Before you begin

To follow this guide you should have a runtime from a chain you wish to query. 

> This could either be one running locally or one running in production.

Author: To avoid confusion, I took this sentence out. The previous one states that the prerequisite is to have a chain running locally. Don't think it makes sense to specify that the user of this guide needs to be ready to use a chain in production - there's not much preparation needed there.

> In order to filter metadata, you will also need to [install JQ](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/download/).

Author: ❤️

## Install and discover the CLI tool

To get started, install Subwasm and explore its commands.

```bash
cargo install --locked --git https://github.com/chevdor/subwasm --tag v0.16.1
```
Make sure you're using the [latest release](https://github.com/chevdor/subwasm/releases). 
This guide is based on version 0.14.1. 

Explore the CLI commands.

```bash
subwasm --help
```

## Get information about a runtime 

1. Launch a local node from inside your chain's directory. 
   This example is launching the node template in dev mode.
   
    ```bash

>     ./target/release/node-template --tmp --dev

Reviewer 2: Can you do this for any pubclic node of any chain? What flags are needed for the node to allow for this (if any)?
Let's clarify and add an example with some public node too :pray:

Author: Made it clearer that then first part uses subwasm for a node running locally and the second uses it for a live chain.

    ```

> 1. In a new terminal, create a temporary folder and use Subwasm to get and save the Wasm of your local chain.

Reviewer: Maybe suggest a name for the folder that you'll use in the example.

    ```bash
    mkdir TempWasms && cd TempWasms
    subwasm get ws://localhost:9944 -o mychain.wasm
    ```

1. Run the following command to save your chain's metadata to a JSON file:

   ```bash
    subwasm --json meta mychain.wasm | jq 'del( .. | .documentation? )' > mychain-metadata.json
   ```

   Using JQ is a useful tool to filter the metadata details from the `subwasm --json meta mychain.wasm` command.
   In this case, we're choosing to ignore all documentation metadata.
   You can have a look at the different metadata fields a Substrate chain exposes [here](https://polkadot.js.org/docs/substrate).

1. Use the custom metadata file in a front-end application. 

## Compare two different runtimes

Using Subwasm, we can also compare the runtimes of a chain at different blocks. 

> In this example, we'll take Polkadot's runtime at block 500 and compare it with its latest runtime.

Author: Added :).

> 1. Go to a block explorer and retrieve the block hash for the runtime your want to compared against.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Go to a block explorer and retrieve the block hash for the runtime you want to compare against.
```

>     For example, go to [PolkadotJS Apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Frpc.polkadot.io#/explorer) and retrieve the block hash at [block 50000](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Frpc.polkadot.io#/explorer/query/50000).

Author: Should be 500000 actually. 👍🏻

    `0xfdeab19649426aadbdab046c9b5dac0a5b0c850b8fd0927e3b4e6c896d5fb0b7`

1. Save the Wasm blob of a previous state.

    ```bash

>     subwasm get --chain polkadot --block 0xfdeab19649426aadbdab046c9b5dac0a5b0c850b8fd0927e3b4e6c896d5fb0b7 -o polkadot-500000.wasm

Reviewer 2: how does subwasm get this info? What node endpoint? Can I specify that?

Author: It has a `get_chain_urls` function that takes a chain URL and returns the node endpoint. It'll pick whichever connects first. See [here](https://github.com/chevdor/subwasm/blob/master/lib/src/chain_urls.rs#L6-L9).

Reviewer 2: cool! can we add this language to the page?

This guide is based on version 0.16.1. 

1. Explore the CLI commands by running the following command:

```bash
subwasm --help
```

## Get information about a runtime of a local chain

1. Launch a local node from inside your chain's directory. 
   This example launches a node template in dev mode.
   
    ```bash
    ./target/release/node-template --tmp --dev
    ```

1. In a new terminal, create a temporary folder.

1. Use Subwasm to get and save the Wasm of your local chain.

    ```bash
    mkdir TempWasms && cd TempWasms
    subwasm get ws://localhost:9944 -o mychain.wasm
    ```
    The `-o` flag will save the the Wasm file to `mychain.wasm`.

1. Run the following command to save your chain's metadata to a JSON file:

   ```bash
    subwasm --json meta mychain.wasm | jq 'del( .. | .documentation? )' > mychain-metadata.json
   ```

   You can use JQ to filter the metadata details from the `subwasm --json meta mychain.wasm` command.
   This example ignores all documentation metadata.
   For information about the metadata fields that a Substrate chain exposes, see the documentation on [Substrate Metadata](https://polkadot.js.org/docs/substrate).

> 1. Use the custom metadata file in a front-end application. 

Author: ```suggestion
1. After you have saved the metadata in a JSON file, you can use it in a front-end application.
```

---
title: Verify Runtime Wasm Binaries with Subwasm
slug: /how-to-guides/v3/tools/subwasm
keywords: tooling, wasm
version: 3.0 
section: how to guides
category: tools
---

[Subwasm](https://github.com/chevdor/subwasm) provides a way to expose the features of the runtime for any Substrate chain. 
This guide shows you how to use Subwasm to do the following:

- Get a snapshot of the modules in a runtime.
- Expose verifiable historical information of a chain's runtime for front end applications.
- Check for changes between two runtimes using a diff.

> ## Before you begin
> 
> - You have the [latest release](https://github.com/chevdor/subwasm/releases) of Subwasm installed.
> - You have a chain running locally that is executing the runtime you wish to examine. 
> - You have [JQ](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/download/) installed in your environment to enable filtering the metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Before you begin
Make sure you have the following:

- The [latest release](https://github.com/chevdor/subwasm/releases) of Subwasm installed.
- A chain running locally that is executing the runtime you wish to examine. 
- [JQ](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/download/) installed in your environment to enable filtering the metadata.
```

   
    ```bash
    ./target/release/node-template --tmp --dev
    ```

1. In a new terminal, create a temporary folder called `TempWasms`.

    ```bash
    mkdir TempWasms
    ```

1. Inside the new folder, use Subwasm to get and save the Wasm of your local chain.

    ```bash
    cd TempWasms
    subwasm get ws://localhost:9944 -o mychain.wasm
    ```
    The `-o` flag will save the the Wasm file to `mychain.wasm`.

1. Run the following command to save your chain's metadata to a JSON file:

   ```bash
    subwasm --json meta mychain.wasm | jq 'del( .. | .documentation? )' > mychain-metadata.json
   ```

   You can use JQ to filter the metadata details from the `subwasm --json meta mychain.wasm` command.
   This example ignores all documentation metadata.
   For information about the metadata fields that a Substrate chain exposes, see the documentation on [Substrate Metadata](https://polkadot.js.org/docs/substrate).

1. After you have saved the metadata in a JSON file, you can use it in a front-end application.

## Compare two different runtimes of a live chain

You can also use Subwasm to compare the runtimes of a chain at different blocks. 

> The following example compares the Polkadot runtime at block 500,000 with its latest runtime.

Author: ```suggestion
Subwasm uses a function that takes the URL of common Substrate chains such as Polkadot, Kusama and Westend, and returns the node's endpoint.
The following example compares the Polkadot runtime at block 500,000 with its latest runtime.
```
